               Banana Farming info Guide for Beginners:


                     Importance of Banana in India:


Banana is one of the major and economically important fruit crop of India. Banana
occupy 20% area among the total area under crop in India. Most of Banana is grown by
planting suckers. The technology development in agriculture is very fast, it results in
developing Tissue Culture Technique.


                          Suitable Climate for Banana Farming :


Banana, basically a tropical crop, grows well in a temperature range of 15ºC – 35ºC
with relative humidity of 75-85%. It prefers tropical humid lowlands and is grown from
the sea level to an elevation of 2000m. above m.s.l.. In India this crop is being
cultivated in climate ranging from humid tropical to dry mild subtropics through selection
of appropriate varieties. Chilling injury occurs at temperature below 12ºC. High velocity
of wind which exceeds 80 km /hr. damages the crop. Four months of monsoon (June to
September) with an average 650-750 mm. rainfall are most important for vigorous
vegetative growth of banana. At higher altitudes, banana cultivation is restricted to a
few varieties like ‘Hill banana”.
Deep, rich loamy soil with pH between 6.5 – 7.5 is most preferred for banana farming.
Soil for banana should have good drainage, adequate fertility and moisture. Saline
solid, calcareous soils are not suitable for banana cultivation. A soil which is neither too
acidic nor too alkaline, rich in organic material with high nitrogen content, adequate
phosphorus level and plenty of potash is good for banana.


                   Suitable Soil Type for Banana Farming :

In Banana Farming , Soil for banana should have good drainage, adequate fertility and
moisture. Deep, rich loamy soil with pH between 6-7.5 are most preferred for banana
cultivation. Ill drained, poorly aerated and nutritionally deficient soils are not suitable for
banana. Saline solid, calcareous soil are not suitable for Banana cultivation. Avoided
soil of low laying areas, very sandy & heavy black cotton with ill drainage.
A soil that is not too acidic & not too alkaline, rich in organic material with high nitrogen
content, adequate phosphorus level and plenty of potash are good for banana.


                            Banana Varieties:

In India, banana is grown under diverse conditions and production systems. in your
banana farming ,Selection of varieties, therefore is based on a large number of
varieties catering to various kinds of needs and situations. However, around 20
cultivars viz. Dwarf Cavendish, Robusta, Monthan, Poovan, Nendran, Red banana,
Nyali, Safed Velchi, Basarai, Ardhapuri, Rasthali, Karpurvalli, Karthali and Grandnaine
etc..Grandnaine is gaining popularity and may soon be the most preferred variety due
to its tolerance to biotic stresses and good quality bunches. Bunches have well spaced
hands with straight orientation of figures, bigger in size. Fruit develops attractive
uniform yellow colour with better self life & quality than other cultivars.


                      Land Preparation for Banana Farming :

Prior to planting banana, grow the green manuring crop like daincha, cowpea etc. and
burry it in the soil. The land can be ploughed 2-4 times and leveled. Use ratovator or
harrow to break the clod and bring the soil to a fine tilt. During soil preparation basal
dose of FYM is added and thoroughly mixed into the soil.
A pit size of 45cm x 45cm x 45cm is normally required. The pits are to be refilled with
topsoil mixed with 10 kg of FYM (well decomposed), 250 gm of Neem cake and 20 gm
of conbofuron. Prepared pits are left to solar radiation helps in killing the harmful
insects, is effective against soil borne diseases and aids aeration. In saline alkali soil
where PH is above 8 Pit mixture is to be modified to incorporate organic matter.
Addition of organic matter helps in reducing salinity while addition of purlite improves,
porosity and aeration. Alternative to planting in pits is planting in furrows. Depnding on
soil strata one can choose appropriate method as well as spacing and depth at which
plant is required to be planted.


                Planting Material in Banana Farming :

About 70% of the farmers are using suckers as planting material while the rest 30%
of the farmers are using tissue culture seedlings. Sword suckers with well developed
rhizome, conical or spherical in shape having actively growing conical bud and
weighing approximately 450-700 gm are commonly used as propagating material.
In Banana Farming , suckers generally may be infected with some pathogens and
nematodes. Similarly due to the variation in age and size of sucker, crop is not
uniform, harvesting is prolonged and management becomes difficult. Therefore, invitro
clonal propagation i.e. Tissue culture plants are recommended for planting. They
are healthy, disease free, uniform in growth and early yielding.


                Advantages of Tissue Culture Planting Material:
1. True to the type of mother plant under well management.
2. Pest and disease free seedlings.
3. Uniform growth, increases yield.
4. Early maturity of crop – maximum land use is possible in low land holding country like
India.
5. Round the year planting possible as seedlings are made available throughout the
year.
6. Two successive ratoons are possible in a short duration which minimizes cost of
cultivation.
7. No staggered harvesting.
8. 95% – 98% plants bear bunches.


                    Planting season in Banana Farming :

Planting of tissue culture Banana can be done throughout the year except when the
temperature is too low or too high. Facility of drip irrigation system is important. There
are two important seasons in Maharashtra, India;
Mrig Baug (Kharif) Month of planting June – July. Kande Baug (Rabi) Month of planting
October – November.


                       Crop Geometry in Banana Farming :

Traditionally banana growers plant the crop at 1.5m x 1.5m with high density, however
plant growth and yields are poor because of competition for sunlight. Various trials are
conducted at Jain Irrigation System R&D farm with Grandnaine as cultivar. And then
suitable spacing of 1.82 m x 1.52 m is being recommended, it accommodates 1452
plants per acre (3630 plants per hectare) keeping row direction North-South with wide
spacing 1.82m between the rows. The region like north India, coastal belt and where
humidity is very high and temp falls down upto 5-7ºC, the planting distance should not
be less than 2.1m x 1.5m.


                      Planting Method in Banana Farming :


Pit planting is commonly followed in garden system of cultivation. A pit size of 0.5 x 0.5
x 0.5 m. is normally required. Small pits are dug in case of ridges and furrows. The pits
are to be refilled with topsoil mixed with 10 kg of FYM (well decomposed), 250 gm of
neem cake and 20 gm of carbofuran. Prepared pits are left open for 15-20 days for
solar radiation to kill all the insects, soil borne diseases and for aeration before refilling.
In saline alkali soil where pH is above 8, pit mixture is to be modified incorporating
organic matter and gypsum.
The suckers are planted in the centre of the pit and soil around is compacted. Plants
are planted in the pits keeping pseudostem 2cm below the ground level. Soil around
the plant is gently pressed. Deep planting should be avoided. The field is irrigated
immediately after planting. Furrow planting is practiced in annual planting system in the
states of Gujarat and Maharashtra. Trench planting is practiced in wet land cultivation
of Cauvery delta region of Tamil Nadu.


                Irrigation or Water Management in Banana Farming :
Banana Irrigation
Banana, a water loving plant, requires a large quantity of water for maximum
productivity. But Banana roots are poor withdrawal of water. Therefore under Indian
condition banana production should be supported by an efficient irrigation system like
drip irrigation.Water requirement of banana has been worked out to be 2000mm per
Annum. Application of drip irrigation and mulching technology has reported improved
water use efficiency. There is saving of 56% of water and increasing yield by 23-32%
under drip.
Irrigate the plants immediately after planting. Apply sufficient water and maintain field
capacity. Excess irrigation will lead to root zone congestion due to removal of air from
soil pores, thereby affecting plant establishment and growth. And hence drip method is
must for proper water management in Banana.


                 Application of Manure and Fertilizers in Banana Farming :

Banana requires high amount of nutrients, which are often supplied only in part by the
soil. Nutrient requirement has been worked out on all India basis is to be 20 kg FYM,
200gm N; 60-70gm P; 300gm K/plant. Banana requires heavy nutrition. Banana crop
requires 7-8 Kg N, 0.7- 1.5 Kg P and 17-20 Kg K per metric tonne yield. Banana
responds well to application of nutrients. Traditionally farmers use more of urea and
less of phosphorous and potash.
In order to avoid loss of nutrients from conventional fertilizers i.e. loss of N through
leaching, volatilization, evaporation and loss of P and K by fixation in the soil,
application of water soluble or liquid fertilizers through drip irrigation (fertigation) is
encouraged. A 25-30% increase in yield is observed using fertigation. Moreover, it
saves labour and time and the distribution of nutrients is uniform.


                   Interculture in Banana Farming :

The Root system of banana is superficial and easily damaged by cultivation, use of
intercrop which is not desirable. However short durational crops (45-60 days) like
mung, cowpea, daincha are to be considered as green manuring crops. Crops from
cucurbitaceous family should be avoided as these carry viruses.


                          Weeding in Banana Farming :

Spraying of Glyphosate (Round up) before planting at the rate of 2 lit/ha is carried out
to keep the plantation weed free. One or two manual weedings are necessary.
Micronutrient Foliar Spray : Combined foliar application of ZnSo4 (0.5%), FcSo4
(0.2%), CuSo4 (0.2%) and H3Bo3 (0.1%) can be adopted to improve morphological,
physiological and yield attributes of banana. The micronutrient spray solution is
prepared by dissolving the following in 100 lit. of water.Zinc sulphate – 500 gm – For
every 10 litre of mixture 5-10 ml of sticker solution such as Teepol should be added
before spraying. Ferrom sulphate – 200 gm – For every 10 litre of mixture 5-10 ml of
sticker solution such as Teepol should be added before spraying.Copper – 200 gm –
For every 10 litre of mixture 5-10 ml of sticker solution such as Teepol should be
added before spraying.

Removal of male buds :
 (Denavelling) Removal of male buds helps fruit
development and increases bunch weight. Male buds are removed from the last 1-2
small hands with a clean cut keeping a single finger in the last hand.
Bunch Spray : Spray of monocrotophos (0.2%) after emergence of all hands takes
care of the thrips. Thrips attack discolors the fruit skin and makes it unattractive.
Bunch Covering : Covering bunch using dried leaves of the plant is economical and
prevents the bunch from direct exposure to sunlight. Bunch cover enhances quality of
fruit. But in rainy season this practice should be avoided.
Sleeving of bunch is done to protect fruits against dust, spray residue, insect and
birds. For this blue plastic sleeves are preferred. This also increases temperature
around developing bunch and helps in early maturity.
Dehandling of false hands of bunch :In a bunch there are some incomplete hands
which are not fit for quality produce. These hands should be removed soon after
bloom. This helps in improving the weight of other hands. Sometimes the hand just
above the false hand is also removed.
Propping : Due to heavy weight of bunch the plant goes out of balance and the
bearing plant may lodge and production and quality are adversely affected. Therefore
they should be propped with the help of two bamboos forming a triangle by placing
them against the stems on the leaning side. This also helps in uniform development
of bunch.


                     Harvesting in your Banana farming :

Banana should be harvested at the physiological maturity stage for better post harvest
quality. The fruit is climacteric and can reach consumption stage after ripening
operation
Maturity indices :These are established on the basis of fruit shape, angularity, grade
or diameter of the median figure of the second hand, starch content and number of
days that have elapsed after flowering. Market preferences can also affect the
decision for harvesting a slight or full mature fruit.
Removal of bunch : Bunch should be harvested when figures of second hand from
top are 3/4 rounded with the help of sharp sickle 30cm above the first hand. Harvest
may be delayed upto 100-110 days after opening of the first hand. Harvested bunch
should generally be collected in well padded tray or basket and brought to the
collection site. Bunches should be kept out of light after harvest, since this hastens
ripening and softening.For local consumption, hands are often left on stalks and sold
to retailers.For export, hands are cut into units of 4-16 fingers, graded for both length
and girth, and carefully placed in polylined boxes to hold different weight depending
on export requirements.


               Post harvest management of Banana farming :

 At collection site injured and over mature fruits are discarded and for local market
bunches should be delivered through lorries or wagons. However, for more
sophisticated and export market where the quality is predominant, bunches should be
dehanded, fruits are cleared in running water or dilute sodium hypochlorite solution to
remove the latex and treated with thiobendasole; air dried and graded on the basis of
size of fingers as already stated, packed in ventilated CFB boxes of 14.5 kg capacity or
as per requirement with polythene lining and pre-cooled at 13-15ºC temperature and at
80-90% RH.
Such material should than be sent under cool chain at 13ºC for marketing


             Yielding of Banana farming :

The planted crop gets ready for harvest within 11-12 months of planting. First ratoon
crop would be ready by 8-10 month from the harvesting of the main crop and second
ratoon by 8-9 months after the second crop.
Thus over a period to 28-30 months, it is possible to harvest three crops i.e. one main
crop and two ratoon crops. Under drip irrigation combined with Fertigation yield of
Banana as high as 100 T/ha can be obtained with the help of tissue culture technique,
even similar yield in the ratoon crops can be achieved if the crop is managed well.


                   Bottom Line:

Banana Farming is Fun and Profitable provided , if climatic conditions
support.
