
Mulberry Cultivation & Silkworm Rearing Guide:-
The following article talks about Mulberry Cultivation.


Introduction:- Sericulture is an agro industry which means, combining both agriculture and industry, the
final product is silk. It is a labour intensive activity is providing direct and indirect employment to a large
number. India has the unique distinction of producing all the four varieties of silk viz., mulberry, muga,
tasar and eri. About 14% of the global raw silk is produced in India, of which more than 50% is mulberry
silk, mostly produced in Karnataka. Besides meeting the ever growing domestic demand, silk in its various
forms is also exported and this sector is one of the important foreign exchange earner for the country
Soil and Climate in Mulberry Cultivation :- Mulberry can grow practically on any type of land except on
very steep lands. Good growths, however, are obtained when it is raised on either flat land or gently
sloping or undulating lands. On more sloppy or steep lands, necessary attention to proper soil
conservation methods as contour drains, contour planting or even bench terracing should be given.
Mulberry Cultivation can be done in a wide range of soils, but best growth is obtained in loamy to clayey
loam soils. The mulberry plant can tolerate slightly acidic conditions in the soil. In the case of too acidic
soils with pH below 5, necessary corrective measures through application of Dolomite or Lime should be
adopted. In case of alkaline soils, application of Gypsum should be resorted to for correction of the soil
alkalinity.
Since, mulberry is a deep rooted plant; the soil should be sufficiently deep up to about two feet in depth.
In respect of elevation, mulberry thrives well upto about 4,000 feet, above growth will be retarded
because of the cooler temperature.
Land preparation for Mulberry Cultivation :- Mulberry falls under the category of perennial crops and
once it is properly raised during the first year, it can come to full yielding capacity during the second year
and lasts for over 15 years in the field without any significant deterioration in the yield of leaf.Usually flat
lands are suitable for irrigated mulberry cultivation. If the slope is more than 15%, suitable land
development measures such as contour bunding, bench terracing, etc. should be adopted.

In mulberry cultivation, field should be prepared by deep ploughing up to a depth of 30-45 cm in order to
loosen the soil and thereafter with a country plough or tractor to bring the soil to a fine tilth. Weeds,
stones should be removed during the preparatory stage. Basal dose of farm yard manure @ 20 tonnes
per hectare is recommended, which has to be thoroughly incorporated into the soil.Farm lands along the
highways, in the vicinity of factories, area irrigated by raw sewage and untreated effluents, plots abetting
other gardens with intensive pesticide usage, water logged areas and tobacco grown land are NOT suitable
locations for mulberry cultivation.
Selection of Variety in Mulberry Cultivation :- The criteria for selection of variety includes fertility of the
land, water availability, region specificity, extent of garden and problematic soils. The yield potential of
high yielding varieties can be best realised in high fertility soils and they respond to intensive irrigation.
Wherever the size of operation is bigger, it is advisable to have a separate garden for chawki rearing for
which a variety like S-36 can be chosen in addition to a high yielding variety for rearing late age worms (M-
5, S-36 & V-1). In alkaline soils, the variety AR-12 is suitable.An improved selection namely K2, also
referred to as M5 is a superior variety evolved by the Institute, which is a vigorous strain responding well
to manuring and capable of giving about 25% more leaf yield. This variety thrives well both under dry as
well as irrigated conditions. Quality wise also, it is superior to the local variety of mulberry and, therefore,
could be used with great advantage in mulberry cultivation.

Planting material and Plantation in Mulberry Cultivation :- Plantation in mulberry cultivation can be
taken up both by cuttings and saplings. However, saplings are always better than cuttings as a planting
material for quick and better establishment. Two cuttings / one sapling are planted at each spot in
desired spacing, Cuttings are planted keeping one bud exposed while the saplings are planted in pits
opened at the spot.
Preparation of cuttings in Mulberry Cultivation :- Cuttings should be prepared from well-matured 6-8
months old shoots of about 1.5 cm diameter. Cuttings of 15-20 cm length with 3-4 healthy buds are
selected for plantation.
Raising of saplingsin Mulberry Cultivation :- Nursery beds with the dimension of 5 m X 1.5 m are
prepared. The land is dug to a depth of 30-40 cm and the soil should be pulverised well. FYM is applied @15 kg per bed and mixed well with the soil. Some quantity of sand is also added to heavy (clayey) soils to
make the soil loose and friable, while some quantity of tank silt or other well decomposed organic matter
has to be applied to sandy soils to increase the water holding capacity. Cuttings should be planted in
nursery beds with a spacing of 15 cm x 10 cm. The full length of cutting is pushed into soil keeping only
one bud exposed above the ground. It should be irrigated twice a week. Fertilizer is applied @ 25:25:25
(N:P:K) kg per hectare after 5-6 weeks when plants sprout well and the root system is established. In
mulberry cultivation, saplings of about 80-90 days old can be used for planting. While uprooting the
saplings, maximum care should be taken to avoid damage to the root system.
Spacing of Plants in Mulberry Cultivation :- In mulberry cultivation,spacing depends upon the soil
conditions, slope, variety and convenience for inter-cultural operations as detailed below:
In the case of rainfed mulberry gardens, the aim should be to raise mulberry plant with a sturdier frame
so that it is able to withstand prevailing drought conditions.
Spacing (Cm.) Suitability No. of plants / ha.
90 x 90 Heavy soils, black soils, heavy rainfall
areas
12345
120 x 60 Sloppy land (hilly areas) 13888
(90 + 150) x 60 Suitable for mechanized farming 13888
Planting in Mulberry Cultivation :- Pit system is ideal in 90 x 90 cm spacing. Pits of 35cm3 are dug and
left for one month, which are later filled with FYM and soil at 1: 2 ratio. Trenches of 35 cm x 35 cm are
also convenient to take up plantation in mulberry cultivation. It is preferable to start the plantation during
the rainy season.
In hilly areas, 3 cuttings of 20-22 cm length are planted in each pit at a spacing of 15 cm. Cuttings not
sprouting in 4-5 weeks need to be replaced by saplings to ensure the required plant density.

Weeding and inter-cultivation in Mulberry Cultivation :- During the initial stage of mulberry plant
establishment in the field, weed growth should be kept to the minimum, so that the growing young plants
are not smothered by the weeds. Atleast two weedings should be carried out during the first six months
after planting of cuttings, once after two months of planting and again after an interval of 2 to 3 months.
The weeding operation should be thorough and the soil should be dug deep to eliminate the weeds with
roots. This deep digging is carried out as part of the weeding operation and results in necessary loosening
of the soil and a stimulation to the plants to grow vigorously. Thus special care should be taken to reduce
the weed growth as much as possible in the first year of planting. Thereafter, the shade effect of the fully
grown mulberry will tend to keep the weeds down. Similarly, periodical inter-cultivation should be carried
out to particularly in the case of dry mulberry cultivation during the first year so that soil loosening results
in better aeration and stimulation of plant growth. This also helps in catching the rain water and its deep
penetration for better retention of soil moisture.
Training and Pruning in Mulberry Cultivation :- In order to get good leaf yield for 15-20 years, it is
necessary to give a good and sturdy frame to the plant. After the planting, the saplings need to be cut at
10-15 cm above the ground level within a week. After the growth period of six months, the plants are to
be cut at a height of 25 cm above the ground level keeping 3-4 strong branches.
In leaf picking method, the first bottom pruning has to be taken up at a height of 20-25 cm from ground
level and second bottom pruning is done (after 3 leaf harvests) again at 30 cm height from ground level.
Afterwards, in leaf harvest method, the middle pruning at a height of 60-70 cm has to be followed once in
a year during Jan-Feb and in shoot harvesting method, each shoot harvest done at 25 cm height which
itself acts as pruning.
Manuring and Fertilizers in Mulberry Cultivation :- Application of a basal dose of organic manure like
compost or cattle manure is necessary for successful establishment of the garden. Thereafter, the young
growing plants should be assisted to put forth vigorous and maximum growth through periodical fertilizer
applications.
FYM has to be applied at 20 t/ ha/ year in two doses following the first bottom pruning and third pruning.
Fertilisers has to be applied as per the recommended schedule and secondary and micro nutrients have to
be applied wherever necessary. Foliar sprays such as Boron (1%) Urea (0.5%), Zinc Sulphate (0.1%), etc.
will improve the leaf quality. The recommended fertilizer dose (kg/ha) is indicated below:
N P K
Rainfed Mulberry
Ist year 50 25 25

II year onwards 100 50 50
Irrigated Mulberry
Shoot harvest Ist year 100 50 50
II year onwards 300 120 120
Leaf Harvest I year 100 50 50
II year onwards 300 120 120
Irrigation/Water supply in Mulberry Cultivation :- Among the various inputs, irrigation ranks high in
giving quick and good results.Regular irrigation at an interval of 8-10 days is ideal. Usually, 1.5 to 2 acre
inch of water per irrigation is enough.It may be noted that there is only one irrigation channel for every
two rows of mulberry plants. This helps in both saving and more effective use of the irrigation water. In
case of water scarcity, drip irrigation can also be adopted for better production.
Harvesting of Mulberry leaves :- Picking of leaves should be carried out in time in mulberry cultivation,
that is to say, when the leaves are at the correct stage of maturity for harvest. Otherwise, part of the
leaves will become over mature coarse and suffer in quality from the point of view of nutritive value for
the silkworms. Also part of the leaves may turn yellow, shed and be lost. Therefore, timely harvest, as the
leaves reach the required stage of maturity, will lead to fuller harvest of the available leaves without
wastage, and realization of maximum yield.
Yield in Mulberry Cultivation :- Normally the expected annual yield is 40-50 t of leaves per acre. In shoot
harvest method, harvesting can be done at an interval of 70 days (5 harvests). In case of leaf harvest
method, first harvest is taken 70 days after 1st pruning and 2nd and 3rd harvest (coinciding with 2nd
bottom pruning) at an interval of 55 days. The fourth harvest is taken 70 days after the 3rd harvest and
5th and 6th at an interval of 55 days.
Silkworm Rearing :-
mulberry leaves as silkworms
feed.
Now let us get into Silkworm rearing in detail.

The silkworm (Bombyx mori) is the chief source for production of fabulous mulberry silk in sericulture
industry. Throughout its rearing period it has to be looked after carefully and nourished with good
quality mulberry leaves. Provision for optimum environmental conditions and protection from pests and
diseases are the other essential requirements. Depending on the number of generations per year, the
silkworms are classified into univoltine, bivoltine or multivoltine races. Univoltine and bivoltines races are
specific for temperate areas whereas multivoltines are for tropical areas. Silkworm rearing involves both
technical and commercial aspects. In tropical areas, where mulberry grows luxuriantly throughout the
year, 5-6 rearings are conducted in a year while in temperate/ sub-tropical areas it is common to raise
one/ two crops.
From hatching to its full grown stage, the silk worms pass through five instars and the worms up to stage
three are called young age worms or Chawki. As they are susceptible to infections and vulnerable to
adverse weather conditions, special care is required for rearing of chawkis. The various stages involved
in chawki rearing are indicated below:
Obtain quality eggs : Disease free layings (DFLs) to be used.
Incubation & Brushing : Ideal storage conditions of 25 to 26o C. temperature and 85% RH, 16 hours of
light and 8 hours of darkness ensures uniform hatching (normally between 9 -12 days from egg laying).
Brush newly hatched larvae on to the rearing beds and sprinkle freshly chopped tender leaves of 0.5 to
1 cm2.
Feed the right quality leaf : Highly nutritious leaves in adequate quantities at suitable intervals of time to
be fed. Top 3-4 full grown leaves immediately below the growing buds are suitable.
Provide right environment : 26-28 oC and 80-85% RH
Feed management : Fresh chopped leaves are spread thinly on the dry beds
Keeping the beds clean
Care during moulting : Provide with optimum temperature and humidity conditions and also necessary
spacing and leaf feed. There has to be low to very low or no feeding during moulting and maintain a
temperature of 24-25oC and RH of 65-70%. The worms will attain maximum growth in minimum time
and will take 3 to 3 ½ days in the first instar and 2 ½ to 3 days in the second instar to go into moult. The
third instar is crucial as this is the intermediary stage between the chawki and late age worms.
Rearing of Late age Worms :- begins from third instar. These worms are voracious feeders. The various
stages for rearing are indicated below :

Sericulture silkworm rearing.
Ensure disinfection two days before brushing of worms. The rearing room and equipments should be
disinfected.
Provide sufficient quantity of leaf. The late age stage consumes 95% of the total feed. Mulberry leaves to
be harvested with optimum maturity with relatively low moisture, high proteins and fibres with less
carbohydrate content.
Ensure good environment : Maintain 24-25o C temperature and 70-75% humidity. The space
requirement for 100 DFLs of multi-voltine races is 100 -200 sq.ft and 200 – 400 sq.ft. for 4th and 5th
instar, respectively : For bi-voltine races, it is 115 -225 sq.ft. and 225 – 550 sq.ft. space for 4th and 5th
instar, respectively.
Ensure hygienic conditions
Protect from natural enemies like Uzi fly
Mounting of ripe worms : Ripe worms to be picked on completion of 6-7 days after passing 4th moult
and provide 26-27 o C and 55-60% RH to ripe worms.
Harvesting of Cocoons : Suitable mountages are used for mounting optimum density of worms (40-45
worms/ sq.ft.). Mountages with worms are not to be exposed to direct sun light and humid conditions
are to be avoided. Cocoons are harvested on 5th to 6th day after mounting which ensures complete
development of pupae. The qualities of good cocoons include uniform size and shape, rich silk content,
less floss, more shell weight, uniform shape, uniform build of cocoons.
Cocoon Yield : The average yield is 40-45 kg. (CB) and 45-50 kg (BV) from 100 DFLs.

The entire process from egg hatching to cocoon in silk worm rearing takes about 26-27 days.
extracted silk from silkworms
Construction of Rearing Shelter for Silkworms:- Mulberry silkworm rearing, being completely
domesticated, demands specified environmental conditions like optimum temperature (24-28oC) and
relative humidity (70-85%). It is therefore necessary to evolve measures for economic cooling through
selection of proper material for wall and roof fabrication, orientation of building, using the right
construction method/design, etc. Further, enough space must be available to carry out leaf preservation,
chawki rearing, late age rearing and moulting and also its effective cleaning and disinfection.
The size of the silkworm rearing house depends upon the quantum and type of rearing. The different
types of rearing are shelf or stand rearing, platform rearing and floor rearing. Shelf rearing requires
minimum space and is most common in India. A floor area of 150 sft. can provide rearing space for 100
Cross bred(CB) DFLs or 75 Bivoltine(BV) DFLs.
In platform rearing, the larvae are shifted to shoot rearing platforms after 3rd moult. Ideal size of each
platform will be 5 x 25 ft. which can accommodate 50 DFLs upto the stage of spinning. Platforms can be
arranged in two/ three tiers with a gap of 2-3 ft. A building floor area of 250-300 sft. is required to rear
100 DFLs of CB layings or 75 DFLs of BV layings.
Bottom Line:- Mulberry cultivation is picking up in many rural areas due to silk demand in India.

