Rice (Paddy) Production.
Rice Cultivation Information Guide

               Introduction of Rice Cultivation:-

         Rice is a cereal grain belongs to the grass family of
Graminae and native to the deltas of the great Asian rivers, the Ganges, the Chang
(Yangtze), and the Tigris and Euphrates. The rice plant grows from 2 to 6 ft tall, with a
round, jointed stem, long pointed leaves and edible seeds borne in dense head on
separate stalks. Rice is one of the most cultivated grain crops in India as well as in
Asian countries and a staple diet of major part of India. India is an important centre for
rice cultivation and consumption. India stands in second position after China in the
production of rice. Methods of growing rice differ greatly in different regions, but in most
Asian countries including India, the traditional hand methods of cultivating and
harvesting rice are still practiced. Modern farming of rice started in most of the
countries which drastically reduced the labour problems and cost of cultivation. There
are machines available from planting to harvesting the rice crop. Some parts of Indian
rural areas still depend on the wet buffalos for land preparation and manpower in
plantation and harvesting. People often confuses with paddy and rice. Rice when it is
still covered by the brown hull is known as paddy. Rice fields are also called paddy
fields or rice paddies. South India consumes more rice than any part of India. Rice can
be used to produce Rice bran oil from its husk apart from using in regular culinary
purpose. There are many varieties of rice cultivated across India. With proper filed
management practices and irrigation facility, rice farming would be the profitable in
short period of time. In India, rice is cultivated in Rabi and Kharif seasons. However, in
some parts of India, rice is being cultivated 3times yearly.


                  Nutrient Values and Health Benefits of Rice:-

The following are the health benefits of
Rice.
Rice is a good source of energy.
Rice is a cholesterol free food.
Rice helps in blood Pressure management.
Rice helps in cancer prevention.
Rice helps in preventing skin problems.
Rice can also helps in preventing chronic constipation.
Rice bran oil supports cardiovascular health.
Rice is a good source of niacin, vitamin D, calcium, fiber, iron, thiamine and riboflavin.


              Common/Local Names of Rice in India:-

Chawal(Hindi), Biyyamu (Telugu), Pacharisi
(Tamil), Pachari (Malayalam), Akki(Kannada), Chaal(Bengali),Taandul (Marathi),Thando
(Konkani), Chaula (Oriya),Chawal (Punjabi),Chawal (Gujarati).
Major Rice Production States In India:- West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Telangana, Punjab, Bihar, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Tamil Nadu,
Haryana, Kerala.


               Improved / Hybrid Varieties of Rice:-

    There are thousands of varieties of hybrid
varieties of rice is available, contact your local seed manufacturer for high yield,
disease resistant and which suitable to your region.
Climate Requirement for Rice Cultivation:- Paddy can be grown under widely
varying conditions of altitude and climate. Rice can be cultivated as high as 3000 m
(mean sea level). Basically Rice crop requires hot and humid climatic conditions for its
successful cultivation. Rice crop is suited for the regions where abundant water supply,
high humid and prolonged sunshine is available. The ideal temperature required
throughout the life period of the crop ranges from 20°C to 40°C.However, the rice crop
can tolerate the temperature up to 42°C.


                 Soil Requirement for Rice Cultivation:-

  Rice can be cultivated on wide variety of soils
such as silts, loams and gravels and can tolerate acidic as well as alkaline soils.
However, deep fertile (rich in organic matter) clayey or loamy soils which can easily be
puddled into mud and develop cracks on drying conditions are considered to be ideal
for growing rice crop.


                Propagation in Rice Cultivation:-

    Propagation is done through seeds.
Cultivation Methods in Rice Farming:- There are 4 methods of cultivation practiced
in paddy farming.
Broadcasting method: In this method, Seeds are sown by hand and this method is
suitable in areas where the soil is not fertile and lands are dry. This requires minimum
labour and inputs. This method produces very less yield when compared to other
sowing methods.


                   Drilling method:

    In this method, Ploughing of land and sowing of seeds can be
carried out by 2 persons. This sowing method is mostly confined to peninsular of
India.


                   Transplantation method:

           This is the most practiced method and this is followed in
regions where soil has good fertility and abundant rainfall/irrigation. In these
methods, paddy seeds are sown in nursery beds. Once seeds are germinated and
seedlings are uprooted (Usually this will happen after 5 weeks), these seedlings can
be transplanted in the main field. This method requires heavy labour and inputs. This
method is proved to be best yielding method.

                   Japanese method:

           High yielding varieties can be included in this method and which
requires heavy dose of fertilizers. Seeds should be sown on raised nursery beds and
should transplant the seedlings in rows. Weeding and fertigation should be carried
out as per schedule. This method is successfully adopted for high yielding hybrid
crops.

              Seed Selection in Rice Cultivation:-

  Seed selection in paddy cultivation plays major
role in getting proper yield of the crop. Farmers are advised to select the best quality
seeds to raise the healthy seedlings.
The following are the steps need to be followed while selecting the seeds for quality.
The selected seed should belong to the proper improved high yielding variety, which
is proposed to be grown.
The selected seed should be clean and free from mixtures of other seeds.
The selected seed should be fully mature, well developed and plump in size.
The selected seed should be free from signs of age or bad storage.
The selected seed should have a high germinating capacity for getting higher yields.
Note: Before sowing the seeds in the field, they should be treated with fungicides to
protect the seed from soil-born fungi disease and also to give a boost to the seedlings.


                 Seed Treatment in Rice Cultivation:-

                 The paddy seeds should be treated with
Agrosan @ 100 gm/50 Kg of seeds to prevent seed-borne diseases. The untreated
high yielding varieties of rice should be soaked for 12 hours in a solution of wettable
ceresan (0.1%). After this, make sure to thoroughly dry in shade before sowing in the
field or nursery bed.


                  Land Preparation, Sowing in Rice Cultivation:-

      The main systems followed in rice
cultivation are ‘dry’, ‘semi-dry’ and ‘Wet’. Basically, the dry and semi-dry systems of
cultivation depends on rains and do not have supplementary irrigation facilities whereas
in wet cultivation system, the rice crop is grown with assured and abundant water
supply either by rain or by irrigation.


                 Dry and Semi-dry system:

        for this system of rice crop the field should have good
tilth that can be achieved by giving couple of ploughings & harrowing. Filed should be
supplemented with farm yard manure (FMY)/compost DISTRIBUTED uniformly 2
weeks to 4 weeks before sowing or planting. The seeds should be sown either by
broadcasting or drilling method and line sowing would help in weeding and
intercultural operations. The row to row spacing in case of drill sowing method is 20
cm to 25 cm.


                        Wet system:

          When following this system of cultivation method, the land should be
ploughed thoroughly and puddled with 3cm to 5 cm of standing water in the field. The
ideal depth of puddling is found to be around 10 cm in clay soils and clay-loamy soils.
The land should be levelled after puddling to facilitate a uniform distribution of water
and fertilizers. Paddy seeds should be sown after sprouting or the seedlings of rice
should be transplanted in the main field.


                   Land Preparation in Rice Cultivation

                    Seed Rate in Rice Cultivation:-

 The seed rate depends on the variety and method
followed. The seed rate for direct sowing by broadcasting is 90 to 100 Kg/ha and by
dibbling it is 70 to 75 Kg/ha. Well-filled and viable seeds should be used and lighter
seeds that float on a solution of common salt should be rejected.



                      Irrigation in Rice Cultivation:-

With water scarcity becoming a major issue in
agriculture, already there are studies going on drip irrigation for paddy cultivation.
However, the popular System of Rice Intensification “SRI” method uses around 120 to
150 lakhs liters per hectare to produce 7 tonnes of rice. During initial period, paddy field
requires abundant water supply especially in wet lands. Water supply should be
reduced periodically before harvesting the crop.


                Intercultural Operations in Rice Cultivation:-
In rice cultivation, mechanical or
manual weeding methods are preferred. Make sure to have rice field weed free up to
45 after sowing the seeds. Weeding with hoe or rotary weeders should be carried.


                    Manures and Fertilizers in Rice Cultivation:-

  As rice crop responds very well to
manure and chemicals, it is essential to fo for proper manures and fertilizers in paddy
cultivation.
Farm yard manure /Compost: 10 to 15 cartloads.
Nitrogen: 100 to 150 Kg/Ha.
Phosphorous: 50 to 60 Kg P2O5/Ha.
Potash: 40 to 50 Kg KO/Ha.
Zinc Sulphate: 25 Kg/Ha.
Green Manuring Crops: Sanai, Dhaincha and Moong/Urad.
Harvesting in Rice Cultivation:- Harvesting on time is essential to avoid shedding of
grains in rice farming. The later stage of grain-ripening is a dehydration process and
maturity is hastened when water is withdrawn from the field at the hardening stage of
the rice crop. For harvesting, early or medium varieties, 26 to 30 days after flowering
and 36 to 40 days after flowering in case of tall varieties are recommended. Field paddy
is to be harvested when the moisture content of the rice grain is 20 to 25 %. Gradual
drying should be carried out in shed for better recovery.


            Paddy Harvesting Using Machine
Yield in Rice Cultivation:-

 Yield depends on many factors like variety, soil type,
cultivation method and farm management practices. With good variety, an average
yield of 2500 kg/ha can be achieved. The yield of rice in India is much lower than
production yield of some other Asian countries.
